 As many of his Republican colleagues were sliding into disconsolate resignation, Senator Ben Sasse of Nebraska sat on a riverbank recently and wrote a meandering missive calling on someone to challenge his party’s presumed nominee, Donald J. Trump, for the presidency.
“Why shouldn’t America draft an honest leader?” he wrote on Facebook. “You know ... an adult?”
Mr. Sasse, 44, a baby-faced former college president who outsmarted a bevy of better-known Republicans to win his seat in 2014, has stood out largely for his conservative voting record, and perhaps for his children, who are home-schooled half of the time in Senate committee hearing rooms and on his office couch.
But Mr. Sasse is now best known for his strident — and counterintuitive — opposition to his party’s standard-bearer, one of the last remnants of “Never Trump” in a Capitol slipping into the vortex of the mogul’s general election campaign.
The House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, has not given Mr. Trump an endorsement — notwithstanding occasional unfounded claims by the candidate’s aides that one is coming — but the two men continue to have what the speaker has called “productive conversations” on policy issues. Senators Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Jeff Flake of Arizona, both Republicans, have treated Mr. Trump like an insufferable relative at a family wedding. But Mr. Graham said he recently had a “cordial” phone call with Mr. Trump on foreign policy, and Mr. Flake has said he is still deciding whether to endorse the businessman.
Far more congressional Republicans have adopted wan smiles and insisted that they will give Mr. Trump their full support. Senator Marco Rubio of Florida, who traded insults with Mr. Trump when he was a presidential candidate, told CNN this week that he would be “honored” to speak on Mr. Trump’s behalf at the Republican convention.
But Mr. Sasse (pronounced Sass) keeps his voice raised, the lone conservative on Capitol Hill still railing, to the consternation of many in his state’s Republican Party.
“I don’t agree with his strategy,” said Deb Fischer, the senior Nebraska senator, whose manner is generally as mild as her state’s farmstead cheese. “I’m not going to hand this election to Hillary Clinton.”
Continue reading the main story
Mr. Sasse is unbowed. “In private, many people will say some version of ‘I wish I could take the position you’ve taken, but I don’t know how that will affect me back home,’ ” Mr. Sasse said during an interview in his Senate office. “I don’t know where it’s written that fighting for what you believe in will always be popular with 51 percent.”
Mr. Trump has responded with his hallmark eloquence. Among his posts on Twitter: “@BenSasse looks more like a gym rat than a U.S. Senator. How the hell did he ever get elected?”
Delegates to the Nebraska Republican Convention were also not charmed. This month, they officially reprimanded Mr. Sasse and opposed his call for a third candidate, moves that were led by Ms. Fischer’s nephew.
Party leaders were also unhappy that Mr. Sasse followed a unity speech by Ms. Fischer by telling the convention that he would not address his anti-Trumpism. He instead delved into his thoughts on ordered liberty and his older daughter’s recent stint living on a cattle ranch.
“The senator missed an opportunity to express himself on this issue at the convention and get an honest reaction from the delegates,” said J. L. Spray, a national Republican committeeman and former state chairman of the party. “It’s a little bit confusing to me at least as to what the senator wants to do now.”
Some have suspected that Mr. Sasse is referring to himself when he speaks of a third way. A Draft Sasse political action committee was even formed, though Mr. Sasse has repeatedly said he has no interest in running, because of his children and his Senate obligations.
Yet in speeches to political gatherings and in interviews with reporters, Mr. Sasse offers a compelling campaign-style message that reflects his impressive academic résumé, his work as a business turnaround specialist, his orientation toward individual rights and his intense religiosity.
A wrestling recruit at Harvard, he also has a Ph.D. from Yale and, at 37, he became the president of Midland University in Fremont, Neb., near where he grew up. At times he sounds like a college professor, lamenting the lack of “cultural catechesis” in America.
A former consultant at the Boston Consulting Group (where Mitt Romney, another vocal Republican opponent of Mr. Trump, once worked), Mr. Sasse also frequently cites the need for “lifelong learning” to deal with “economic disruption.” He says that while the Democrats are trying to “make America European again,” the Republicans are trying to make it “1950 again.”
Mr. Sasse, an evangelical Christian, easily quotes Scripture without notes. Last month, at a Family Research Council event in Washington, Mr. Sasse contextualized his political theology.
“There is a great risk in our time that our people who are scared and who are disoriented will vest too much in politics, and they will believe that their American-ness is the center of their identity,” he said. “And I am here to tell you, brothers and sisters, that is idolatrous.”
(He talks less about his government service, including a stint in the Department of Health and Human Services during the Bush administration.)
That blending of messages helped him sail to victory in his Senate race. “We were completely inspired,” said Dr. Marie Belin, a pediatrician in Omaha. “He was someone who focused more on his principles rather than toeing the party line.”
Mr. Sasse can sound dismissive of the Senate’s work. “I would like to see us do something beyond the small bore,” he said.
His seniority is so low (he is tied for 99th) that his Senate office is split between two floors. He has an unusual routine, keeping one of his daughters in Washington for a week and then rotating in the other one. His 14-year-old, Elizabeth, helps with legislative mail, and the 12-year-old, Alexandra, gives tours of the Capitol when other offices are short a guide. On the off weeks, the girls are home-schooled by his wife, Melissa, in Nebraska with their 5-year-old brother, Breck.
The senator’s propensity for voting no on bills he finds to exceed the scope of government strikes some colleagues as sincere constitutionalism, but exasperates others. When she learned he had cast the lone vote against her bill to combat opioid abuse, Senator Kelly Ayotte, a New Hampshire Republican, rolled her eyes and said, “Whatever, dude.”
Mr. Sasse insists that talking about the presidential race is only one part of his public mission. “I never made a decision not to support Donald Trump,” he said. “I was just never persuaded that he was trustworthy.”